AUTHOR GUIDELINES FOR 8.5x11-INCH PROCEEDINGS MANUSCRIPTS

Congratulations on the acceptance of your paper for publication. Please 
follow the steps outlined below when submitting your Postscript file to the 
IEEE Computer Society Press. Please read the following carefully.

(1) ALL MANUSCRIPTS MUST BE IN ENGLISH.

(2) FORMATTING YOUR PAPER. All text must be in a two-column format. The 
total allowable width of the text area is 6-7/8 inches (17.5 cm) wide by 
8-7/8 inches (22.54 cm) high. Columns are to be 3-1/4 inches (8.25 cm) 
wide, with a 5/16 inch (0.8 cm) space between them. The main title (on 
the first page) should begin 1-3/8 inches (3.49 cm) from the top edge of 
the page. The second and following pages should begin 1.0 inch (2.54 cm) 
from the top edge. On all pages, the bottom margin should be 1-1/8 
inches (2.86 cm) from the bottom edge of the page for 8.5 x 11-inch 
paper; for A4 paper, approximately 1-5/8 inches (4.13 cm) from the 
bottom edge of the page.

(3) TYPE-STYLE AND FONTS. Wherever Times is specified, Times Roman may 
also be used. If neither is available on your word processor, please 
use the font closest in appearance to Times that you have access to. PLEASE DO NOT USE ANY RYUMIN FONTS.

MAIN TITLE. Center the title 1-3/8 inches (3.49 cm) from the top edge 
of the first page. The title should be in Times 14-point, boldface type. 
Capitalize the first letter of nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs; 
do not capitalize articles, coordinate conjunctions, or prepositions (unless 
the title begins with such a word). Leave two blank lines after the title.

AUTHOR NAME(s) and AFFILIATION(s) are to be centered beneath the title 
and printed in Times 12-point, non-boldface type. This information is to 
be followed by two blank lines.

The ABSTRACT and MAIN TEXT are to be in a two-column format. 

The ABSTRACT is to be in fully-justified italicized text, at the top of 
the left-hand column, below the author and affiliation information. Use 
the word "Abstract" as the title, in 12-point Times, boldface type, 
centered relative to the column, initially capitalized. The abstract is 
to be in 10-point, single-spaced type. The abstract may be up to 3 in. 
(7.62 cm) long. Leave two blank lines after the Abstract, then begin the 
main text. 

MAIN TEXT. Type main text in 10-point Times, single-spaced. Do NOT use 
double-spacing. All paragraphs should be indented 1 pica (approximately 
1/6 inch or 0.422 cm). Be sure your text is fully justified -- that is, 
flush left and flush right. Please do not place any additional blank 
lines between paragraphs. Figure and table captions should be 10-point 
Helvetica (or a similar sans-serif font) boldface type; callouts should 
be 9-point Helvetica, non-boldface. Initially capitalize only the first 
word of section titles and first-, second-, and third-order headings.

FIRST-ORDER HEADINGS. (For example, 1. Introduction) should be Times 
12-point boldface, initially capitalized, flush left, with one blank 
line before, and one blank line after.

SECOND-ORDER HEADINGS. (For example, 1.1. Database elements) should be 
Times 11-point boldface, initially capitalized, flush left, with one 
blank line before, and one after. If you require a third-order heading 
(we discourage it), use 10-point Times, boldface, initially capitalized, 
flush left, preceded by one blank line, followed by a period and your 
text on the same line.

(4) FOOTNOTES. Use footnotes sparingly and place them 
at the bottom of the column on the page on which they are referenced. 
Use Times 8-point type, single-spaced. To help your readers, avoid using 
footnotes altogether and include necessary peripheral observations in 

the text (within parentheses, if you prefer, as in this sentence).

(5) REFERENCES. List and number all bibliographical references in 9-point 
Times, single-spaced, at the end of your paper. When referenced in the 
text, enclose the citation number in square brackets, for example [1]. 
Where appropriate, include the name(s) of editors of referenced books.

(6) COLOR. DO NOT SUBMIT COLOR IMAGES IN YOUR FILE UNLESS SPECIFICALLY INSTRUCTED TO DO SO.
